Because had this revolution not been, and had it
not taken place, I imagine today I'd probably be in
Mexico.
And we all would have missed an opportunity.
Now, if you had stayed in Mexico and there had been
no revolution, presumably you would have been
part of the upper class. Probably. But there was a
revolution, and there has been and were
revolutions since then. Anyway, we don't know
what destiny would have had in store for us over
there, but we are fortunate. the revolution took
place, and we left Mexico. And we're most
grateful.
Neither you nor your parents have ever given any
thought of going back to Mexico? No. We're most
grateful for the blessings that we received. Have
you ever been back just to visit? Oh, yes. You've
been back to your old hometown? I went once to the
hometown. I was there for a very short while. I saw
places that brought back memories of my infancy.
And, of course, the place has changed
considerably. And it was just out of curiosity
that I went back to this particular place.
Was the family home still there? The family home
had been confiscated by the government for, I
guess, an unpayment of taxes. We had several...
plantations that belonged or would have belonged
to my mother by descent and distribution that
nobody ever cared to make a claim for.
We were too happy in the
United States.
The country around here, around El Paso, is it very
different in physical appearance from the part of
Chihuahua you were from, or is it similar?
Similar. In Santa Barbara, the mining town was dry
and arid. El Paso has similar mountains, similar
climate. However, El Valle is an oasis. a lot of
vegetation.
This country that we passed over was mostly
farmlands, farms and ranches scattered from El
Valle and Peral, north to Delicias.
Now coming through Nica was quite an arid
experience, an arid portion of the country.
But
we don't see it that way. We just
looked forward in making an exodus out of a
turmoiled country. How did your family happen to
come to Chihuahua, that is your ancestors, in the
beginning?
I don't know. They say that one of my ancestors had
been a general in the army, the Porfirio Diaz
regime. But that's hearsay. Now, from my mother's
side, they were all farmers from in the area around
El Valle in Peral.
And they had come into the area, do you remember in
what years they came into the area? I have no idea.
But they must have come in there as pioneers.
Pioneers, they must have. At one time. Right. From
the south. Or,
we have no idea. We used to hear about our
grandfather on the paternal side being the
general in the Diaz army. We don't know, I don't
know whether that was braggadocious or not.
However, my experience since I was able to cope
with reasoning power
I don't remember of any incident
that was not related to, like I said, when my father
left. He left us in Santa Barbara. It was terrible.
That must have been right in 1910 or 1911 when he
first left? Sometime around that age. How did he
hear that he had to get out of town? Oh. Everybody
knew as soon as the revolution started breaking
here, there, and built pots of resistance here.
Everybody knew that a científico was the arced
enemy of the revolutionary element. And it was a
class struggle and a vicious one.
The proletariat had venom and vindictiveness and
wrath upon this class of people. So that's why
Father left. He left this small mining town in
Santa Barbara. I think he had been Presidente
Municipal there, or had been affluent with the
government. And he knew that if he stayed there, he
would be one of the first individuals that
reprisals would be taken against him. And that's
why he left as far as Canada. Get a whole country
between. That's right. Did anyone ever really
bother your mother and the small children? Oh,
yes. They used to be the proletariats that would
come around the household and would sing dirty and
nasty songs about the revolution and about people
in Mexico that were scared to death. And they would
sing.
We had neighbors that would come in and sing these
songs. And they said, now that the revolution is
here, now you are going to get it. and songs of
threats and of intimidation.
And we were constantly in fear. Every time a band of
different rebels would come into the city, like I
told you, they would use that tank as a target.
Several times after the battles were over, we
could hear a knock or expect a knock at the door of
the house and open the door and a bunch of soldiers
and horses, horseback, very unusual looking
characters with their guns and cartuchetas all
over them and the officer knocking down at the
door. They would say, all right, boys, come on in.
some troops would go in there bayonets guns look
for the enemy and we the officer would on numerous
occasions said we heard that you were shooting at
us from this area
right sometimes mother and the children would be
out on the sidewalk and in the evening conversing
All of a sudden, we'd hear turmoil coming down the
street, a mob of people hollering. And we would
holler and say, the Madaristas are coming. And we
would all go in doors, lock ourselves.
We had a great big door for this one. And one night,
Mother was visiting with ladies on the street, on
the sidewalk there, sitting down, taking air.
When we heard this commotion coming down the
street and we rushed in, I locked the door. I got my
thumb cut in between me. That's why we had one thumb
larger than the other. Oh, my goodness. It was
smashed. And, of course, little incidents. But we
could expect that a daily occurrence. We wanted to
get out of there. Did you hear from your father by
mail or any other way during this period? No way.
One night, or in the early hours of the morning,
here he comes with his big, big wee child.
All right, get ready. We're leaving in the
morning. And that was the first time in nearly two
years your mother had even known he was alive, for
sure, I guess. I guess so. That's the first night I
was able to recognize my father. That's the first
mental impression. So it must have been a year or
two that I was growing up and had no conception of
what my father looked like until that night that I
saw him. I knew he was my father because mother told
me. And of course, the affections.
The rest of the kids. I said, oh, they had this great
big hat. disguised as a proletariat. No time to
lose. He must have been a very brave man to come back
in. Right. For all of you that way. I don't know how
he got there, but he had this wagon, a team of mules,
and off he took.
Going through the back roads.
Yes, it was a very interesting experience. Well,
when you got to the States, did any of you speak
English? I was the guest speaker at the White
House. LBJ took a liking to me, I don't know why, and
he would invite me to the White House to be the guest
speaker. And he named me on several committees for
the purpose of creating and organizing and
building a new society. And I spoke at the White
House one night about a little incident that took
place here in El Paso with me while I was going to
school. I went to Alamo School. After I became of
age, I wasn't old enough to go to school. I think I
had to wait some two years, maybe a year, I don't
know. Anyway, I went to Alamo
school, and the lady there, the teacher, Ms. Witt,
taught us children how to raise our little two
fingers. Anytime we wanted to go to the restroom
and use these magical words, may I be excused. So
she was a bilingualist. She told us what it meant.
One day Mrs. Whip becomes ill, and they have a
substitute, a beautiful blonde girl with blue
eyes. Oh, she was beautiful. And in due time, I
raised my little fingers. Teacher, my biscus. She
turned around and says, if it's absolutely
necessary. Well, not being a bilingualist, I did
not know what if it's absolutely necessary meant.
So I took it and presumed that my permission had
been denied. So five minutes later, I raised my two
little fingers again and said, teacher, may I have
an excuse? And I got the same answer, if it's
absolutely necessary. I sat down. And about five
minutes later, I raised my fingers again and asked
for the excuse. And she again said, if it's
absolutely necessary. Well, ladies and
gentlemen, by that time, it had become apparent
that it had been necessary. Since thereafter, the
kids in school changed my nickname from Kiko to
something else which was very embarrassing. But
the reason I'm relating that, this is what I was
telling it, is because We did not possess the
ability of understanding. And we needed at that
time, as it's needed now, a course or something
that would teach the children going for the first
time to an American English-speaking school at
least the rudiments of the English language.
It would be very obvious. It was quite obvious.
Now, do you remember when it was that you really
began to learn English? How many years of school
did it take? Well, the first, probably six months
after I went to school, I started learning
English. Not only in school, but by singing these
little songs that the children get in the first
grade. And learning, how do you do, Will? How do you
do, Fly? This is Will. This is Fly. This is Mel. We
learned all flat in first grade, but probably six
or seven months after you're in school. But I
learned English a little faster than those
children. Not because I heard it at home. but
because I heard it downtown, selling papers and
shining shoes and learning that the mystery word
for sir or senor was mister. And mister shine,
mister paper, mister this, and gradually you
start building a vocabulary of what you hear from
other people. So it was beyond the school
experience then. In working, you needed the
language. And that provided an extra. It was both
in school, but mostly the most effective teacher
that I had was in the streets selling newspaper.
Paper, mister? Paper, mister? He would say, no,
thank you. No. Well, no and no is the same. And
gradually, you start building a vocabulary, a
street vocabulary.
Tramp, that was about the second word I learned.
And of course, you marvel with amazement why I
should learn the word tramp. Well, the fellow who
would give us his newspapers. Somehow or other,
the rest of the kids, instead of calling the
circulation manager, or the distributor, he
would count out the papers. And he says, here. And
they called that man who would give the papers out
Tramp. Because as I later found out, that the
Tramps coming in and out, trenching people of the
cities, would get jobs also selling papers. But
they were older than we were. Consequently, they
would be the distributors. And they would, people
would call them tramps because they had floated
into the city of El Paso. I guess that's why. Well,
when you were arrested, you spoke pretty good
English by that time, didn't you? By that time,
yes. I was about 12 years old, and I was going to
Bailey, Bailey School. That's right. I started in
Bailey School in the fifth grade. And as you
remember, First, we lived at 1011 East 3rd, and
we're going to Alamo School, clearly a school
wherein no English was utterly spoken until,
uttered or spoken in until you got to the second and
third, fourth grade. So your first year in school
was taught in Spanish? No, in English, but the
ability to simulate and learn English was lacking
because most... None of the students could speak
English. None of the students. We'd go in the
playground and we'd holler and joke and speak to
one and the other in Spanish. On the second grade in
San Jacinto School, we moved to an environment
where more English and American people were
living at that time. What was the name of... I
forgot. And consequently we had more of a
intermingling with the Anglo-American children
and we started playing and calling a bat and a
football and give me this and give me that. And most
of the, I guess, the vocabularies was built in the
playgrounds or in communications with other
children. I don't think a vocabulary, actually
the vocabulary was being built in the classrooms,
though we had the words and spelling and whatnot.
But I think the ability to adopt ourselves into
thinking and speaking English came by
associating with other English-speaking
children. The Spanish-speaking children that
you were growing up with, how many of them would you
say had come to get away from the revolution? How
many of them were refugees? A lot of them. Calderon
families, Rocha family. Mr. Rocha had taken up his
residence on San Antonio Street on the 1100 block,
and he had been a general in Diaz's army. And most of
the, there was an organization that was later
started here called the Casino Social Mexicano,
the Mexican casino. And all of them were of
affluent people from Mexico. And they
established quite a cultural
club. And they gave and fiestas. parties,
gatherings, social gatherings for the Mexican
refugee. And Mrs. Terrazas would meet Mrs.
Gonzalez and say, well, what did you get here? And
so on. It was really, El Paso was a colony for the
refugees, the affluent and the poor. Well, our
period of transition from an affluent to a poor
family came or was brought about in Mexico because
we left as a broken down
bankrupt affluent. And when we got here, we had
nothing but the... You had had lands in Mexico.
Yes. But you just let them go. Right. And we had no
resources. here in the United States, and we did
not bring with us any resources because we didn't
have any. Was this true of most of the affluent
refugee families, or did some of them manage to
come in with... A lot of the families, the refugees
of the affluent class, came in with their dollars
and cents. And waiting for a time to get
acclimated, Some of them remained and some of them
went back.
When did they begin going back, those that went
back? I don't think they went back until after 1932
because, or during the Depression, because
Mexico was in a turmoil with different
revolutions one right after another. And if I had
been fleeing from the revolution because I was an
effluent, I certainly wouldn't have gone back
until there was a different form of government.
But of course, as you know, the revolutionary
party or the revolutionary element gained
control of Mexico in the present time. They
celebrate the victory of the revolution. And all
of them that have become affluent were at one time a
revolutionary element, let's put it like that, or
their parents were. Some of these new fortunes
that have been built have been built or have been
acquired by individuals, children of the
revolution.
So if we had been affluent and had funds with which
to go back to Mexico, I don't think her
family, brothers and sisters, would have cared to
go back to Mexico. Did you have any family that did
stay in Mexico? That is, on your- Oh, yes. We had a
lot of the family, members of the family that
stayed in Mexico. My uncle, who had been
Presidente Municipal of the city of Chihuahua,
remained in Mexico in Chihuahua. He lost his
shirt. He was involved in mining operations,
money-making deals in property and whatnot, but
he went broke. And most of the African people who
remained in Mexico went broke. Their properties
were confiscated.
Some of them were executed. Your
uncle's family now is his children. Are they still
in Mexico?
left Chihuahua and she came to reside here with
relatives and she married here in El Paso, married
an American citizen. And
she had three children, a girl and two boys.
One of the boys is a professor at the University
Texas. His name is Provencio. You may know him. In
what department is he in? I don't know. I think he's
in the mathematics department. Jesus, not Jesus.
What is his first name? Anyway, he is a professor
and he was grandson of my uncle. His other two her
other two children. are in Mexico, one of them
decided to become an American, a Mexican citizen,
though he was born here, they had dual
nationality, and he took it upon himself. His name
is Marcus, and Jesus Provencio, and what is the
name of the girl? She decided to be an American, and
she was working one time at the American Embassy in
Mexico City.
So there were different choices made at that time.
Now, the Matas remained mother's
relatives. They all remain in Mexico, the Mata
family. Let me draw this out just a minute. I can get
a clearer idea if I draw. See
if I draw a picture. There's your mother and your
father. Could I scoot up here a little bit? Yes, by
all means.
Okay. I got it. Okay. And let's see, your father's
name was... My father's name was Francisco.
Francisco... Galvan. G-A-L-V-A-N. And your
mother's name was... Susanna.
Marta. M-A-T-A. Galvan, by marriage.
And then here are you and your brothers and
sisters, and these would be...
All right, your uncle, your father's brother
stayed in Chihuahua. Yeah, Guadalupe Galvan.
That's Guadalupe.
And he was married to... A Cejas, Mercedes Cejas.
And they were effluent to say hus. I don't know how
to spell say hus. C-E-J-A-S, I'm guessing. Say.
Say hus? Say hus. Let's
see. I don't know. S-E-Y, say hus.
Yeah. S-E-Y or S-E-I, I think, J-A-L-S,
Cejas. No, never mind the L, just J-S.
S-E-I-J-A-S,
Cejas.
Now, there was a very prominent attorney in Juarez
and in Chihuahua by the name of Cejas. Mm-hmm.
related or a brother of Mercedes.
And the Cejas were a very affluent
both cultural and economical
family in Chihuahua. So my uncle married a very
well-to-do family. Did they remain well-to-do
after the revolution? I don't think so. But as far
as you know, they stayed in Mexico. Yeah. Then they
had these children you were mentioning who
were... Marcos. Marcos, who stayed in Mexico.
Right.
Jesus. Jesus. Who was a professor at UTEP.
And I don't remember the girl's name. And she also
is an American citizen? An American citizen. When
did these children come to the States? Do you
remember? Yes, they were educated in the States.
And all the children were born in the States. Oh. It
was the... Guadalupe and Mercedes did come to the
United... Wait a minute. Guadalupe and
Mercedes... Remained in Mexico, and they had a
daughter here. Oh, I missed it. Okay, I missed...
They just had the one daughter. That's right. And
she... Okay. I missed a generation. Yeah. Okay,
they had a daughter. Whose name? Do you remember
her name? Mercedes. Mercedes.
Who married...
Provencio. Provencio. In El Paso. Provencio,
what was his last name? That's his last name. Oh,
that's his last name. Mr. Provencio, I don't
remember his last name. And he was from El Paso. He
was from El Paso.
And then their children were educated in the
States. Were born here in El Paso and were educated
in the States. I think he, Marcus, went to
University of Colorado, both of them. And I don't
know where she went to Laredo here. And then when
they became of age, Marcus went to Mexico and took
up his Mexican citizenship. And he remained in the
United States as a professor and used to work. He
had quite a hard time getting his professorship
because he had one time moved to Juarez and was
involved in a, mind you, an engineer, electrical
engineer, going to Juarez and becoming a TV
repairman.
And I said, Marcos, I mean, Chuy, you're wasting
your talents. What are you doing in Mexico? You
know you're not a Mexican citizen. You know you
were born in the United States, and you have a
college. You have a degree in, I think, an
electrical engineer from Colorado University.
What are you doing in Mexico there? I said, you
better move back to the United States right away.
You're illegally in Mexico.
You come over here, and we'll push you. What are you
doing there? I can't understand an educated man
like you. So I was influential in getting him back
here in the United States. This was Jesus. That's
right, the professor right now. Did he ever say why
it was that he went back? No. I think he was
influenced by Mother or Marcus.
Marcus had a very good position, an engineer in
Mexico City.
They're very nice people, and of course we never
have had any disagreement at all, but a political
view, and I suggested to Marcus that he quit
associating himself in Mexico. Not because I hate
Mexico, because I thought it was wasting his
opportunity. that he had become educated in the
States. And then going down there and becoming an
engineer of a radio station that wasn't paying him
anything. And just because he was an engineer and
had the title of an engineer, he's got a title here
of an engineer. Now he's got the title of a
professor. And he, of course, realizes that I was
right in advising him.
Did you think there's really more opportunity for
a person in this country than in Mexico? Oh,
surely. The integrity of the nation,
the integrity of our law, the opportunities
now that are being offered. I have always told my
constituents that we are worth two
Anglo-Americans because we have two different
cultures. And that we had not been paid
accordingly because it was our fault. And it was
our fault because we did not exploit or use our
talents to the full degree and to the fullness of
our capacities. And that we were to show the
industry that we were by linguists and by culture
and dedicated to our tasks and we would be able to
show them that we were worthy of certain
considerations. And of course I think presently
there has been the swinging of the pendulum that
have recognized the individual for what he's
worth and not what he used to be nor the color of his
skin nor the color of his eyes. How much of this do
you think is partly a matter of time, that with so
many of the people who came from Mexico having come
just at the early part of this century, that maybe,
you know, it's the story of so many other people who
have come from so many other places, that it's a
matter of perhaps the first generation of
adjustment and then the real potential being
recognized. Right. Well, it has here in the United
States. through the efforts of the government,
Equal Employment Opportunity Council, of which I
was the chairman, and the own minority groups to be
able to show that they have the talent. And
eventually, the discrimination of classes,
discrimination of races, are fast disappearing.
Oh, I can remember here when they had signs, no
Mexicans allowed in public places. And I can
remember when Bowie High School was refused a ROTC
unit. I went and spoke to the school board about it.
And it has come to pass that what I said, and that's
why the president gave me this recognition, that
it has come to pass that all the prophecies and all
our dreams are gradually becoming realities. But
it wasn't a reality that had to come overnight and
quickly. It was a reality that came into and is
continuing to be carried on forward because of
the, first of all, the, let's call it, if we may, the
tolerance that the majority had or had given,
finally, the minority. Well, they call it
tolerance and we call it a vested inherent right
that we had. But call it what it may, it has
gradually developed into the recognition of the
talents of the minority. Well, when you first When
you first came to El Paso, was there that much
discrimination against people of Mexican
origin? It was when you first, in the very
beginning. Oh, in the very beginning, yes. In the
very beginning, there was this discrimination
that we did not become aware of it until we started
growing up and finding out. And just like I said in
the White House, and like I told them here just
recently, why were there two different
outhouses? Never heard that for El Paso. Oh, yes.
In El Paso, in the Washington Park, a public place
where the children of the Ale inhabitants would go
on a Sunday afternoon to play. There would be an
outhouse, a red brick building for whites, for
Mexicans, and colored. And this from the very
early period? Early period, as soon as I started to
be able to find my way to the Washington Park by
riding a streetcar. And this applied to the
children of the very affluent who had come during
the Revolution? Everybody without any... They
were not according to themselves. They were not
Mexicans. They were Spanish.
Well then, which restroom did they use? They had to
use a restroom that said for Mexicans or blacks.
And I, of course, I'm a great kidder, public
speaking. I said, I don't know what was wrong with
our insides.
Were they white? The Anglo-American perfumed
inside?
Do you have any idea when this distinction arose?
Because, after all, El Paso was settled by Spanish
Mexicans. And, you know, like, they were here
first. And the Anglos were really latecomers.
Have you ever read, I'm sure you have, the Diary of
the Pilgrims by Mr. Fleming? No, I haven't. I'll
write it down.
Mr. Fleming speaks and writes of the coming of the
Pilgrims, and he writes a diary of everything that
took place, including the mild standage and his
army of twenty men, and how they finally settled in
Plymouth. And the pilgrims went out and
investigated the surrounding territory and the
characteristics of the territory. They found a
bunch of sand mounds on the hill tops. They
wondered what it was and they started digging into
it and they found that it contained some vegetable
matters. a vegetable that they had never seen
before. They took this vegetable and removed it in
their ears and they found out it had a cob and little
grains. They took it into the Mayflower and
started investigating it and finally someone got
the idea that it must be edible and they cooked it
and they found out that it was corn. They named it
corn. That was an introduction of corn. So they
went back to this mountain, looked into them, and
they found it full of ears of corn. So they start
taking them into the Mayflower, when upon here
comes a bunch of Indians shooting bows and arrows
at them. And they said they were not welcomed in the
United States or in this country by these savages.
So they started building a cantonment
fortification. They got through. And then one
Sunday, little did they know why the
vindictiveness of the Indian towards them and
their hate. And one Sunday afternoon after church
services, here comes a buxom Indian, knocks at the
door of the cantonment and shows himself that he
has no weapons. Miles Standage opens the doors and
they aim the guns, the shotguns they had at this
fellow. Then in perfect English he says, welcome
to America.